Label-Free Supervision of Neural Networks with
Physics and Domain Knowledge
Russell Stewart , Stefano Ermon

arXiv:1609.05566v1 [cs.AI] 18 Sep 2016

Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
{stewartr, ermon}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
In many machine learning applications, labeled data is scarce
and obtaining more labels is expensive. We introduce a new
approach to supervising neural networks by specifying constraints that should hold over the output space, rather than direct examples of input-output pairs. These constraints are derived from prior domain knowledge, e.g., from known laws of
physics. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach on
real world and simulated computer vision tasks. We are able
to train a convolutional neural network to detect and track
objects without any labeled examples. Our approach can significantly reduce the need for labeled training data, but introduces new challenges for encoding prior knowledge into
appropriate loss functions.

Introduction
Applications of machine learning are often encumbered by
the need for large amounts of labeled training data. Neural networks have made large amounts of labeled data even
more crucial to success (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton
2012; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton 2015). Nonetheless, we
observe that humans are often able to learn without direct
examples, opting instead for high level instructions for how
a task should be performed, or what it will look like when
completed. In this work, we ask whether a similar principle can be applied to teaching machines; can we supervise
networks without individual examples by instead describing
only the structure of desired outputs?
Contemporary methods for learning without labels often fall under the category of unsupervised learning. Autoencoders, for example, aim to uncover hidden structure in
the data without having access to any label. Such systems
succeed in producing highly compressed, yet informative
representations of the inputs (Kingma and Welling 2013;
Le 2013). However, these representations differ from ours as
they are not explicitly constrained to have a particular meaning or semantics.
In this paper, we explicitly provide the semantics of the
hidden variables we hope to discover, but still train without labels by learning from constraints (see (Shcherbatyi and
Andres 2016) for an introduction to this idea). Intuitively, algebraic and logical constraints are used to encode structures
Copyright c 2017, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

f

X

Y

g

R

Figure 1: Constraint learning aims to recover the transformation f without providing labels y. Instead, we look for a
mapping f that captures the structure required by g.
and relationships that are known to hold because of prior
domain knowledge. The process of providing these necessary constraints may still require large amounts of domain
specific engineering.
Nevertheless, by training without direct examples of the
values our hidden (output) variables take, we gain several
advantages over traditional supervised learning, including
1) a reduction in the amount of work spent labeling, and 2)
an increase in generality, as a single set of constraints can
be applied to multiple data sets without relabeling. The primary contribution of this work is to demonstrate how constraint learning may be used to supervise neural networks
across three practical computer vision tasks. We explore the
challenge of simultaneously learning feature representations
over raw data and avoiding trivial, low entropy solutions in
the constraint space.

Problem Setup
In a traditional supervised learning setting, we are given a
training set D = {(x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xn , yn )} of n training examples. Each example is a pair (xi , yi ) formed by an instance xi ∈ X and the corresponding output (label) yi ∈ Y .
The goal is to learn a function f : X → Y mapping inputs to outputs. To quantify performance, a loss function
` : Y × Y → R is provided, and a mapping is found via
f ∗ = arg min
f ∈F

n
X

`(f (xi ), yi )

(1)

i=1

where the optimization is over a pre-defined class of functions F (hypothesis class). In our case, F will be (convolu-

tional) neural networks parameterized by their weights. The
loss could be for example `(f (xi ), yi ) = 1[f (xi ) 6= yi ].
By restricting the space of possible functions specifying
the hypothesis class F, we are leveraging prior knowledge
about the specific problem we are trying to solve. Informally, the so-called No Free Lunch Theorems state that every machine learning algorithm must make such assumptions in order to work (Wolpert 2002). Another common
way in which a modeler incorporates prior knowledge is by
specifying an a-priori preference for certain functions in F,
incorporating a regularization
Pnterm R : F → R, and solving for f ∗ = arg minf ∈F i=1 `(f (xi ), yi ) + R(f ). Typically, the regularization term R : F → R specifies a preference for “simpler” functions (Occam’s razor). Regularization techniques such as dropout (Srivastava et al. 2014) are
key to avoid overfitting when training functions with a massive number of parameters.
In many ML settings, the input space X is complex (images), while the output space Y is simple (e.g., a binary classification problem where Y = {0, 1}). Here, we are interested in structured prediction problems, where both X and
Y are complex. For example, in our first experiment, X corresponds to image sequences (video) and Y to the height
of an object as it is moving through the air. The goal is to
identify a function f ∗ that correctly maps frames to the corresponding height of the object. Clearly, the heights in each
frame are not independent, and the sequence demonstrates a
well-defined (algebraic) structure. In fact, we known from
elementary physics that any correct sequence of outputs
forms a parabola. In principle, one could incorporate this
prior knowledge by considering only valid subsets of sequences Y parabola ⊂ Y , and restricting the hypothesis class
F accordingly. This approach, however, would still require
labels, and is difficult to combine with established and very
successful regularization methods for neural networks.
In this paper, we model prior knowledge on the structure
of the outputs by providing a weighted constraint function
g : X × Y → R, used to penalize “structures” that are not
consistent with our prior knowledge. When Y is a (multidimensional) discrete space (e.g., describing many potential
binary attributes of an image) as in our third application,
g can be specified compactly using a graphical model approach, as a sum of weighted potential or constraints that
only depend on a small subsets of the variables (Richardson and Domingos 2006) (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira
2001).
The question we explore in this paper is whether this weak
form of supervision is sufficient to learn interesting functions. While one clearly needs labels, y, to evaluate f ∗ , labels may not be necessary to discover f ∗ . If prior knowledge informs us that outputs of f ∗ have other unique properties among functions in F, we may use these properties
for training rather than direct examples y. Specifically, we
consider an unsupervised approach where the labels yi are
not provided to us, and optimize for a necessary property of
the output, g instead. That is, we search for
fˆ∗ = arg min
f ∈F

n
X
i=1

g(xi , f (xi )) + R(f )

(2)

If we are fortunate, f ∈ F optimizing (2) but not (1), will
be either nonexistent or too strange to converge to in practice when combined with commonly used hypothesis classes
(convolutional layers encoding translation invariance) and
regularization terms R. When this is the case, we can use
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to optimize (2) in place
of (1), freeing us from the need for labels.
When optimizing (2) is not sufficient to find f ∗ , we will
add additional regularization terms to supervise the machine
towards correct convergence. For example, as we will see in
our person detection experiment, if g is undesirably satisfied
by a f ≡ C constant output, we can add a term to favor outputs with higher entropy. The process of designing the loss
g and the regularization term R is a form of supervision, and
can require a significant time investment. But unlike hand
labeling, it does not increase proportional to the size of the
data, |D|, and can be applied to new data sets often without
modification.

Experiments
The goal of our method is to train a network, f , mapping
from inputs to outputs that we care about, without needing
direct examples of those outputs. In our first two experiments, we construct a mapping from an image to the location of an object it contains. Learning is made possible by
exploiting structure that holds in images over time. In our
third experiment, we map an image to two boolean variables
describing whether or not the image contains two special objects. Learning exploits the unique causal semantics existing
between these objects. Across our experiments, we provide
labels only for the purpose of evaluation.

Tracking an object in free fall
In our first experiment, we record videos of an object being
thrown across the field of view, and aim to learn the object’s
height in each frame. Our goal is to obtain a regression network mapping from Rheight×width×3 → R, where height and
width are the number of vertical and horizontal pixels per
frame, and each pixel has 3 color channels. We will train
this network as a structured prediction problem operating on
a sequence of N images to produce a sequence of N heights,
N
Rheight×width×3
→ RN , and each piece of data xi will be
a vector of images, x. Rather than supervising our network
with direct labels, y ∈ RN , we instead supervise the network to find an object obeying the elementary physics of
free falling objects. Because gravity acts equally on all objects, we need not encode the object’s mass or volume.
An object acting under gravity will have a fixed acceleration of a = −9.8m/s2 , and the plot of the object’s height
over time will form a parabola:
yi = y0 + v0 (i∆t) + a(i∆t)2
This equation provides a necessary constraint, which the
correct mapping f ∗ must satisfy. We thus train f by making
incremental improvements in the direction of better satisfying this equation.

