arXiv:1909.11830v2 [cs.LG] 25 Nov 2020

Can Q-Learning with Graph Networks Learn a
Generalizable Branching Heuristic for a SAT Solver?

Vitaly Kurin∗
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
vitaly.kurin@cs.ox.ac.uk

Saad Godil
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California
United States
sgodil@nvidia.com

Shimon Whiteson
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk

Bryan Catanzaro
NVIDIA
Santa Clara, California
United States
bcatanzaro@nvidia.com

Abstract
We present Graph-Q-SAT, a branching heuristic for a Boolean SAT solver trained
with value-based reinforcement learning (RL) using Graph Neural Networks for
function approximation. Solvers using Graph-Q-SAT are complete SAT solvers
that either provide a satisfying assignment or proof of unsatisfiability, which is
required for many SAT applications. The branching heuristics commonly used in
SAT solvers make poor decisions during their warm-up period, whereas GraphQ-SAT is trained to examine the structure of the particular problem instance to
make better decisions early in the search. Training Graph-Q-SAT is data efficient
and does not require elaborate dataset preparation or feature engineering. We train
Graph-Q-SAT using RL interfacing with MiniSat solver and show that GraphQ-SAT can reduce the number of iterations required to solve SAT problems by
2-3X. Furthermore, it generalizes to unsatisfiable SAT instances, as well as to
problems with 5X more variables than it was trained on. We show that for larger
problems, reductions in the number of iterations lead to wall clock time reductions,
the ultimate goal when designing heuristics. We also show positive zero-shot
transfer behavior when testing Graph-Q-SAT on a task family different from that
used for training. While more work is needed to apply Graph-Q-SAT to reduce
wall clock time in modern SAT solving settings, it is a compelling proof-of-concept
showing that RL equipped with Graph Neural Networks can learn a generalizable
branching heuristic for SAT search.

1

Introduction

Boolean satisfiability (SAT) is an important problem for both industry and academia that impacts
various fields, including circuit design, computer security, artificial intelligence and automatic theorem
proving. As a result, modern SAT solvers are well crafted, sophisticated, reliable pieces of software
that can scale to problems with hundreds of thousands of variables [33].
∗

The work was done when the author was a research intern at NVIDIA.

34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

SAT is known to be NP-complete [22], and most state-of-the-art open-source and commercial solvers
rely on multiple heuristics to speed up the exhaustive search, which is otherwise intractable. These
heuristics are usually meticulously crafted using expert domain knowledge and are often iteratively
refined via trial and error. In this paper, we investigate how we can use machine learning to improve
upon an existing branching heuristic without leveraging domain expertise.
We present Graph-Q-SAT, a branching heuristic in a Conflict Driven Clause Learning [40, 21, CDCL]
SAT solver trained with value-based reinforcement learning (RL), based on deep Q-networks [30,
DQN]. Graph-Q-SAT uses a graph representation of SAT problems similar to Selsam et al. [39]
which provides permutation and variable relabeling invariance. Graph-Q-SAT uses a Graph Neural
Network [13, 4, GNN] as a function approximator to provide generalization as well as support for a
dynamic state-action space. Graph-Q-SAT uses a simple state representation and a binary reward that
requires no feature engineering or problem domain knowledge. Graph-Q-SAT modifies only part of
the CDCL based solver, keeping it complete, i.e., always yielding a correct solution.
We demonstrate that Graph-Q-SAT outperforms Variable State Independent Decaying Sum [31,
VSIDS], the most frequently used CDCL branching heuristic, reducing the number of iterations
required to solve SAT problems by 2-3X. Graph-Q-SAT is trained to examine the structure of the
particular problem instance to make better decisions at the beginning of the search, whereas the
VSIDS heuristic suffers from poor decisions during the warm-up period.
Our work primarily focuses on the machine learning perspective and thus more work would be
required to apply Graph-Q-SAT in industrial-scale SAT settings. However, Graph-Q-SAT exhibits
intriguing properties which might eventually be useful for practical applications. We show that our
method generalizes to problems five times larger than those it was trained on. We also show that
Graph-Q-SAT generalizes across problem types from satisfiable (SAT) to unsatisfiable instances
(unSAT). We show that reducing the number of iterations, in turn, could reduce wall clock time,
the ultimate goal when designing heuristics. We also show positive zero-shot transfer properties of
Graph-Q-SAT when the testing task family is different from the training one. Finally, we show that
some of these improvements are achieved even when training is limited to a single SAT problem,
demonstrating data efficiency.

2

Background

2.1

SAT problem

A SAT problem involves finding variable assignments such that a propositional logic formula is
satisfied or showing that such an assignment does not exist. A propositional formula is a Boolean
expression, including Boolean variables, ANDs, ORs and negations. The term literal is used to refer
to a variable or its negation. It is convenient to represent Boolean formulas in conjunctive normal
form (CNF), i.e., conjunctions (AND) of clauses, where a clause is a disjunction (OR) of literals. An
example of a CNF is (x1 ∨ ¬x2 ) ∧ (x2 ∨ ¬x3 ), where ∧, ∨, ¬ are AND, OR, and negation respectively.
This CNF formula has two clauses: (x1 ∨ ¬x2 ) and (x2 ∨ ¬x3 ). In this work, we use SAT to denote
both the Boolean Satisfiability problem and a satisfiable instance, which should be clear from the
context. We use unSAT to denote unsatisfiable instances.
There are many types of SAT solvers. We focus on CDCL solvers, MiniSat [10] in particular, because
it is an open-source, minimal, but powerful implementation. A CDCL solver repeats the following
steps: every iteration it chooses a variable and assigns it a binary value. This is called a decision.
Then, the solver simplifies the formula building an implication graph and checks whether a conflict
emerged. Given a conflict, the solver can infer (learn) new clauses and backtrack to the variable
assignments where the newly learned clause becomes unit (consisting of a single literal). Learnt
clauses force a variable assignment which avoids the previous conflict. Sometimes, CDCL solver
undoes all the variable assignments keeping the learned clauses to escape futile regions of the search
space. This is called a restart.
We focus on the branching heuristic because it is one of the most heavily used during the solution
procedure. The branching heuristic is responsible for picking the variable and assigning some value to
it. VSIDS [31] is one of the most used CDCL branching heuristics. It is a counter-based heuristic that
keeps a scalar value for each literal or variable (MiniSat uses the latter). These values are increased
2

