Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (05/2024)

G4SATBench: Benchmarking and Advancing SAT Solving
with Graph Neural Networks
Zhaoyu Li

zhaoyu@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto

Jinpei Guo

mike0728@sjtu.edu.cn

arXiv:2309.16941v2 [cs.LG] 10 May 2024

Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xujie Si

six@cs.toronto.edu

University of Toronto

Reviewed on OpenReview: https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= 7VB5db72lr

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have recently emerged as a promising approach for solving
the Boolean Satisfiability Problem (SAT), offering potential alternatives to traditional backtracking or local search SAT solvers. However, despite the growing volume of literature in
this field, there remains a notable absence of a unified dataset and a fair benchmark to evaluate and compare existing approaches. To address this crucial gap, we present G4SATBench,
the first benchmark study that establishes a comprehensive evaluation framework for GNNbased SAT solvers. In G4SATBench, we meticulously curate a large and diverse set of SAT
datasets comprising 7 problems with 3 difficulty levels and benchmark a broad range of GNN
models across various prediction tasks, training objectives, and inference algorithms. To explore the learning abilities and comprehend the strengths and limitations of GNN-based
SAT solvers, we also compare their solving processes with the heuristics in search-based
SAT solvers. Our empirical results provide valuable insights into the performance of GNNbased SAT solvers and further suggest that existing GNN models can effectively learn a
solving strategy akin to greedy local search but struggle to learn backtracking search in the
latent space. Our codebase is available at https://github.com/zhaoyu-li/G4SATBench.

1

Introduction

The Boolean Satisfiability Problem (SAT) is a crucial problem at the nexus of computer science, logic, and
operations research, which has garnered significant attention over the past five decades. To solve SAT instances efficiently, modern SAT solvers have been developed with backtracking (especially with conflict-driven
clause learning, a.k.a. CDCL) or local search (LS) heuristics that effectively exploit the instance’s structure
and traverse its vast search space (Biere et al., 2009). However, designing such heuristics remains a highly
non-trivial and time-consuming task, with a lack of significant improvement in recent years. Conversely, the
recent rapid advances in graph neural networks (GNNs) (Li et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Xu et al.,
2019) have shown impressive performances in analyzing structured data, offering a promising opportunity
to enhance or even replace modern SAT solvers. As such, there have been massive efforts to leverage GNNs
to solve SAT over the last few years (Holden et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2022).
Despite the recent progress, the question of how (well) GNNs can solve SAT remains unanswered. One
of the main reasons for this is the variety of learning objectives and usage scenarios employed in existing
work, making it difficult to evaluate different methods in a fair and comprehensive manner. For example,
NeuroSAT (Selsam et al., 2019) predicts satisfiability, NeuroCore (Selsam & Bjørner, 2019) classifies unsatcore variables, QuerySAT (Ozolins et al., 2022) constructs a satisfying assignment, and NSNet (Li & Si, 2022)
1

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (05/2024)

predicts marginal distributions of all satisfying solutions to solve the SAT problem. Moreover, most previous
research has experimented on different datasets that vary in a range of settings (e.g., data distribution,
instance size, and dataset size), which leads to a lack of unified and standardized datasets for training and
evaluation. Additionally, some work (Amizadeh et al., 2019b; Shi et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023) has noted
the difficulty of re-implementing prior approaches as baselines, rendering it arduous to draw consistent
conclusions about the performance of peer methods. All of these issues impede the development of GNNbased solvers for SAT solving.
To systematically quantify the progress in this field and facilitate rapid, reproducible, and generalizable
research, we propose G4SATBench, the first comprehensive benchmark study for SAT solving with GNNs.
G4SATBench is characterized as follows:
• First, we construct a large and diverse collection of SAT datasets that includes instances from distinct
sources and difficulty levels. Specifically, our benchmark consists of 7 different datasets from 3 benchmark
families, including random instances, pseudo-industrial instances, and combinatorial problems. It not only
covers a wide range of prior datasets but also introduces 3 levels of difficulty for each dataset to enable
fine-grained analyses.
• Second, we re-implement various GNN-based SAT solvers with unified interfaces and configuration settings, establishing a general evaluation protocol for fair and comprehensive comparisons. Our framework
allows for evaluating different GNN models in SAT solving with various prediction tasks, training objectives, and inference algorithms, encompassing the diverse learning frameworks employed in the existing
literature.
• Third, we present baseline results and conduct thorough analyses of GNN-based SAT solvers, providing a
detailed reference of prior work and laying a solid foundation for future research. Our evaluations assess
the performances of different choices of GNN models (e.g., graph constructions, message-passing schemes)
with particular attention to some critical parameters (e.g., message-passing iterations), as well as their
generalization ability across different distributions.
• Lastly, we conduct a series of in-depth experiments to explore the learning abilities of GNN-based SAT
solvers. Specifically, we compare the training and solving processes of GNNs with the heuristics employed
in both CDCL and LS-based SAT solvers. Our experimental results reveal that GNNs tend to develop a
solving heuristic similar to greedy local search to find a satisfying assignment but fail to effectively learn
the CDCL heuristic in the latent space.
We believe that G4SATBench will help the research community to make significant strides in understanding
the capabilities and limitations of GNNs for solving SAT and facilitate further endeavors in this domain.

2

Related Work

SAT solving with GNNs. Existing GNN-based SAT solvers can be broadly categorized into two
branches (Holden et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2022): standalone neural solvers and neural-guided solvers. Standalone neural solvers utilize GNNs to solve SAT instances directly. For example, a stream of research (Bünz
& Lamm, 2017; Selsam et al., 2019; Jaszczur et al., 2020; Cameron et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2023) focuses
on predicting the satisfiability of a given formula, while several alternative approaches (Amizadeh et al.,
2019a;b; Ozolins et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Yan et al., 2023) aim to construct a satisfying assignment.
Neural-guided solvers, on the other hand, integrate GNNs with modern SAT solvers, trying to improve their
search heuristics with the prediction of GNNs. These methods typically train GNN models using supervised
learning on some tasks such as unsat-core variable prediction (Selsam & Bjørner, 2019; Wang et al., 2021),
satisfying assignment prediction (Zhang et al., 2020), glue variable prediction (Han, 2020), and assignment
marginal prediction (Li & Si, 2022), or through reinforcement learning (Yolcu & Póczos, 2019; Kurin et al.,
2020) by modeling the entire search procedure as a Markov decision process. Despite the rich literature on
SAT solving with GNNs, there is no benchmark study to evaluate and compare the performance of these
GNN models. We hope the proposed G4SATBench would address this gap.
2

