NSNet: A General Neural Probabilistic Framework
for Satisfiability Problems

arXiv:2211.03880v1 [cs.AI] 7 Nov 2022

1

Zhaoyu Li1,2 , Xujie Si1,2,3
McGill University, Mila – Quebec AI Institute, 3 CIFAR AI Research Chair
{zli199, xsi}@cs.mcgill.ca
2

Abstract
We present the Neural Satisfiability Network (NSNet), a general neural framework that models satisfiability problems as probabilistic inference and meanwhile
exhibits proper explainability. Inspired by the Belief Propagation (BP), NSNet
uses a novel graph neural network (GNN) to parameterize BP in the latent space,
where its hidden representations maintain the same probabilistic interpretation as
BP. NSNet can be flexibly configured to solve both SAT and #SAT problems by
applying different learning objectives. For SAT, instead of directly predicting a
satisfying assignment, NSNet performs marginal inference among all satisfying
solutions, which we empirically find is more feasible for neural networks to learn.
With the estimated marginals, a satisfying assignment can be efficiently generated
by rounding and executing a stochastic local search. For #SAT, NSNet performs
approximate model counting by learning the Bethe approximation of the partition
function. Our evaluations show that NSNet achieves competitive results in terms
of inference accuracy and time efficiency on multiple SAT and #SAT datasets 1 .

1

Introduction

The Boolean Satisfiability Problem (SAT) and the Sharp Satisfiability Problem (#SAT, or model
counting) are fundamental challenges for computer science, with numerous applications including
software verification [12, 19], hardware design [28, 36], and planning [14, 15]. Although modern SAT
and #SAT solvers have achieved practical success in these domains, the performance of satisfiability
solvers heavily relies on custom search heuristics [8]. However, designing good heuristics is highly
non-trivial and time-consuming. With the superior learning ability of neural networks, recent research
on satisfiability problems has migrated from hand-engineered methods toward data-driven ones.
Various neural methods have been proposed for satisfiability problems [18]. A line of research aims at
building standalone neural solvers, which directly predicts the satisfiability [35, 22, 10] or a satisfying
assignment [2, 3, 31] of a given instance. Other approaches integrate the neural modules into classic
solvers, improving the branching heuristics in SAT [34] or #SAT [42] solvers. Yet, despite recent
progress, the interpretation of these neural networks still remains a mystery: why and how can neural
networks learn to tackle satisfiability problems? Answering this question is crucial for utilizing
neural networks on satisfiability problems, especially for designing better neural architectures.
This paper addresses the above question by developing an explainable neural framework that can be
interpreted using graphical models. Specifically, we propose Neural Satisfiability Network (NSNet),
a novel graph neural network (GNN) framework taking the formulation of solving satisfiability
problems as probabilistic inference. Inspired by the inference algorithm Belief Propagation (BP),
NSNet adopts a new graph encoding for propositional formulas and employs a novel message passing
mechanism that subsumes the BP’s updating rules in the latent space. In such a manner, NSNet serves
1

Code is available at https://github.com/zhaoyu-li/NSNet.

36th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2022).

Perform marginal inference
Round

Estimate the partition function

Estimated marginals

Initialize

Initial assignment

SAT

SLS Solver
Satisfying assignment

NSNet
Input formula

#SAT
Estimated the log
partition function

Figure 1: Overview of our pipeline for solving SAT and #SAT problems. For SAT, we apply NSNet to
perform marginal inference and use the estimated marginals to guide the initialization of a SLS solver.
For #SAT, NSNet itself can serve as an approximate solver by estimating the partition function.
as a neural extension of BP and allows the inference to learn from data. Like BP, NSNet can estimate
both marginals and the partition function of graphical models. This key observation makes NSNet an
effective unified solution to both SAT and #SAT problems (Figure 1).
Existing neural SAT solvers [2, 3] aim to predict a single satisfying assignment for a satisfiable
formula. However, there can be multiple satisfying solutions, making it unclear which particular
solution should be generated. Instead of directly predicting a solution, NSNet performs marginal
inference in the solution space of a SAT problem, estimating the assignment distribution of each
variable among all satisfying assignments. Although NSNet is not directly trained to solve a SAT
problem, its estimated marginals can be used to quickly generate a satisfying assignment. One simple
way is to round the estimated marginals to an initial assignment and then perform the stochastic
local search (SLS) on it. Our experimental evaluations on the synthetic datasets with three different
distributions show that NSNet’s initial assignments can not only solve much more instances than
both BP and the neural baseline but also improve the state-of-the-art SLS solver to find a satisfying
assignment with fewer flips.
To solve #SAT, we formulate it as the partition function estimation of graphical models. NSNet
learns the Bethe approximation of the partition function and thus acts as an approximate #SAT solver.
Experiments on the BIRD and SATLIB benchmarks illustrate that our method notably surpasses both
BP and the recent neural approach. Compared with the state-of-the-art approximate #SAT solvers,
NSNet can estimate the solutions with more than three orders of magnitude speedup, while still
achieving competitive precision.

2

Preliminaries

Satisfiability Problems. In propositional logic, a Boolean formula consists of Boolean variables
and logical operators such as negations (¬), conjunctions (∧), and disjunctions (∨). It is typical to
represent Boolean formulas in conjunctive normal form (CNF), expressed as a conjunction of clauses,
each of which is a disjunction of literals (a variable or its negation). Given a CNF formula, the SAT
problem asks whether there exists an assignment to its variables that can satisfy the formula, whereas
the goal for #SAT is to count the number of all satisfying solutions.
Factor Graphs. A factor graph is a bipartite graph with a set of variable nodes connected to a
set of factor nodes, where each factor node expresses the dependencies among the variables it is
connected. Let p denote a distribution defined over n discrete random variables and xi be a possible
assignment of the i-th variable Xi . Then we may define the joint probability p(x) of an assignment
x = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } using m factors {f1 , f2 , . . . , fm } as:
!
m
m
X Y
1 Y
p(x) =
fa (xa ), Z =
fa (xa ) ,
(1)
Z a=1
x
a=1
where each factor fa takes an assignment of its associated variables xa ⊆ x as input, Z is the
normalization constant, which is also known as the partition function.
In the case of satisfiability problems, each Boolean variable and clause in a CNF formula correspond
to a variable and a factor node in a factor graph respectively. Given a factor fa with its associated
2

