Survey propagation: an algorithm for satisability
(1,3)
(2)
, M. Mézard
, R. Ze
A. Braunstein

hina

(3)

International S hool for Advan ed Studies (SISSA),
via Beirut 9, 34100 Trieste, Italy
2
Laboratoire de Physique Théorique et Modèles Statistiques,
CNRS and Université Paris Sud,
Bât. 100, 91405 Orsay edex, Fran e
1
The Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoreti al Physi s (ICTP),
Str. Costiera 11, 34100 Trieste, Italy
1

(Dated: 26th November 2024)

arXiv:cs/0212002v4 [cs.CC] 4 Apr 2006

We study the satisability of randomly generated formulas formed by M

lauses of exa tly K

literals over N Boolean variables. For a given value of N the problem is known to be most di ult
when α = M/N is

lose to the experimental threshold αc separating the region where almost all

formulas are SAT from the region where all formulas are UNSAT. Re ent results from a statisti al
physi s analysis suggest that the di ulty is related to the existen e of a
of the solutions when α is

lose to (but smaller than) αc .

lustering phenomenon

We introdu e a new type of message

passing algorithm whi h allows to nd e iently a satisable assignment of the variables in this
di ult region. This algorithm is iterative and

omposed of two main parts. The rst is a message-

passing pro edure whi h generalizes the usual methods like Sum-Produ t or Belief Propagation: it
passes messages that are surveys over
detailed probabilisti

lusters of the ordinary messages. The se ond part uses the

information obtained from the surveys in order to x variables and simplify

the problem. Eventually, the simplied problem that remains is solved by a

I.
The satisability problem is the ar hetype of
intra table in the worst

onventional heuristi .

INTRODUCTION
ombinatorial optimization problems whi h are well known to be

ase. However, experimental studies show that many instan es of satisability are surprisingly

easy, even for naive heuristi

algorithms. In an attempt to get a better understanding of whi h instan es are easy or

hard to solve, a lot of eorts have fo used in re ent years on the 'random K-sat' problem[1℄. Instan es of this problem
are generated by

onsidering N variables and M = αN

lauses, where ea h
lause ontains exa tly K distin t variables,


and is pi ked up with uniform probability distribution from the set of



N
K

2K possible

lauses. For a given value

of α, the probability PN (α) that a randomly generated instan e is SAT is a de reasing fun tion, with PN (0) = 1 and

limα→∞ PN (α = 0), whi h has been shown to approa h, as N in reases, a step fun tion
law [2℄, or a `phase transition'. It is

onvenient to identify a

hara teristi

of a zero-one

rossover regime between 'SAT' and 'UNSAT' regimes

using the value αc (N ) of the number of

αc (N ) is supposed to

onstraints per variable where PN (αc (N )) = 1/2. From numeri al simulations,
onverge, in the large N limit, to a value around αc ≃ 4.27 [9, 10, 11, 12℄, but this onvergen e

has not yet been established rigorously. Interestingly, the performan e of algorithms is found to be mu h worse around
this value of α = 4.27: randomly generated instan es with α near to the phase transition are parti ularly di ult to
solve.
Rigorous lower and upper bounds have been found for this

onje tured satisability threshold: it has been estab-

lished that limN →∞ PN (α) = 1 for α < αlb and limN →∞ PN (α) = 0 for α > αub . The present best bounds for the
ase of the random 3-SAT problem (with K

αlb = 3.42 (from [4℄, using algorithmi

= 3) are αub = 4.506 (from [3℄, using the rst moment method) and
analysis). Note also the interesting algorithm-independent upper bound found

in [5, 6℄ using the se ond moment method, whi h be omes better for larger values of K .
Re ently, some elaborate statisti al physi s methods have been brought to bear on the random satisability problem.
These non-rigorous analyti al

al ulations have put forward some interesting

onje tures about what happens in the

solution spa e of the problem as this threshold is approa hed[13, 14℄ (see also previous work in [7, 8℄). They suggest
the following overall pi ture, whi h should hold for a generi

sample of the random satisability problem, in the limit

N → ∞, with α xed.
1. There exists a SAT-UNSAT phase transition at a

riti al value αc whi h

an be

omputed by solving some

( ompli ated) integral equation; for K = 3, one gets αc ≃ 4.267
2. There exists a se ond threshold αclust separating two phases whi h are both `SAT' (in ea h of them there exists
a satisable assignment with probability 1), but with very dierent geometri

stru tures:

2
3. For α < αclust , a generi

problem has many solutions, whi h tend to form one giant  luster; the set of all

satisfying assignments forms a

onne ted

luster in whi h it is possible to nd a path between two solutions

that requires short steps only (ea h pair of

onse utive assignments in the path are

distan e). In this regime, lo al sear h algorithms and other simple heuristi s
This region is

lose together in Hamming

an relatively easily nd a solution.

alled the 'easy-SAT' region

4. For αclust < α < αc , there exists a 'hard SAT' phase where the solution spa e breaks up into many smaller
lusters. Solutions in separate

lusters are generally far apart: it is not possible to transform a SAT assignment

in one

luster into another one in a dierent

of this

lustering ee t, lo al sear h algorithms tend to have a very slow

luster by

hanging only a nite number of variables. Be ause
onvergen e when applied to large N

instan es.
So far, the analyti

method used in the most re ent statisti al physi s analysis, named the

non rigorous, and turning this type of approa h into a rigorous theory is an open subje t of
Note however that, in the simpler
be

avity method[16℄, is

urrent resear h[18, 19℄.

ase of the random K-XOR-SAT, the validity of this statisti al physi s analysis

onrmed by rigorous studies [20, 21℄, and the above

lustering

onje ture has been fully

Interestingly, the statisti al physi s analysis suggests a new e ient heuristi

an

onrmed.

algorithm for nding SAT assignments

in the hard SAT phase, whi h has been put forward by two of us in [14℄. The aim of this paper is to provide a detailed
self- ontained des ription of this algorithm, whi h does not rely on the statisti al physi s ba kground. We shall limit
the des ription to the regime where solutions exist, the so

alled SAT phase; some modi ation of the algorithm allows

to address the optimization problem of minimizing the number of violated

onstraints in the UNSAT phase, but it

will not be dis ussed here.
The basi

building blo k of the algorithm,

alled survey propagation (SP), is a message passing pro edure whi h

resembles in some respe t the iterative algorithm known as belief propagation (BP), but with some
whi h will be des ribed.

BP is a generi

algorithm for

ru ial dieren es

omputing marginal probability distributions in problems

dened on fa tor graphs, whi h has been very useful in the

ontext of error

orre ting

odes [25℄ and Bayesian

networks [15℄.
While in simple limits we are able to give some rigorous results together with an expli it
belief propagation pro edures, in general there exists no rigorous proof of
provide

omparison with the

onvergen e of the algorithm. However, we

lear numeri al eviden e of its performan e over ben hmarks problems whi h appear to be far larger than

those whi h

an be handled by present state-of-the-art algorithms.

The paper is organized as follows: Se t. II des ribes the satisability problem and its graphi al representation in
terms of a fa tor graph. Se t. III explains two message passing algorithms, namely warning propagation (WP) and
belief propagation (BP). Both are exa t for tree fa tor graphs. Even if they are typi ally unable to nd a solution
for random SAT in the interesting hard-SAT region, they are shown here be ause they are in some sense the basi
building blo ks of our survey propagation algorithm. Se t. IV explains the survey propagation algorithm itself, a
de imation pro edure based on it, the `survey inspired de imation' (SID), and the numeri al results. In Se t.V we give
some heuristi

arguments from statisti al physi s whi h may help the reader to understand where the SP algorithm

omes from. Se t. VI

II.

ontains a few general

omments.

THE SAT PROBLEM AND ITS FACTOR GRAPH REPRESENTATION

We onsider a satisability problem onsisting of N Boolean variables {xi ∈ {0, 1}} (where {0, 1} ≡ {F, T }), with
i ∈ {1, ..., N }, with M onstraints. Ea h onstraint is a lause, whi h is the logi al OR of the variables or of their
negations. A lause a is hara terized by the set of variables i1 , ..., iK whi h it ontains, and the list of those whi h
a
are negated, whi h an be hara terized by a set of K numbers Ji ∈ {±1} as follows. The lause is written as
r

(zi1 ∨ ... ∨ zir ∨ ... ∨ ziK )

(1)

a
where zir = xir if Ji

= −1 and zir = x̄ir if Jiar = 1 (note that a positive literal is represented by a negative J ). The
r
problem is to nd whether there exists an assignment of the xi ∈ {0, 1} whi h is su h that all the M lauses are true.
ost C of a onguration x = (x1 , ..., xN ) as the number of violated lauses.
In what follows we shall adopt the fa tor graph representation [23℄ of the SAT problem. This representation is

We dene the total

onvenient be ause it provides an easy graphi al des ription to the message passing pro edures whi h we shall develop.
It also applies to a wide variety of dierent
The SAT problem
vertex in the graph,

ombinatorial problems, thereby providing a unied notation.

an be represented graphi ally as follows (see g.1). Ea h of the N variables is asso iated to a
alled a variable node ( ir les in the graphi al representation), and ea h of the M

asso iated to another type of vertex in the graph,

lauses is

alled a fun tion node (squares in the graphi al representation).

