Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

M ASKED U NSUPERVISED S ELF - TRAINING FOR L ABEL FREE I MAGE C LASSIFICATION
Junnan Li, Silvio Savarese, Steven Hoi
Salesforce Research
{junnan.li,ssavarese,shoi}@salesforce.com

arXiv:2206.02967v2 [cs.CV] 10 Mar 2023

A BSTRACT
State-of-the-art computer vision models are mostly trained with supervised learning
using human-labeled images, which limits their scalability due to the expensive
annotation cost. While self-supervised representation learning has achieved impressive progress, it still requires a second stage of finetuning on labeled data. On the
other hand, models pre-trained with large-scale text-image supervision (e.g., CLIP)
have enabled zero-shot transfer to downstream image classification tasks. However,
the zero-shot performance of CLIP-like models are often insufficient for real-world
adoption. In this paper, we aim to leverage the abundant unlabeled data from a target
domain to improve the performance of a pre-trained zero-shot classifier, by unsupervised finetuning of the pre-trained model. We propose Masked Unsupervised
Self-Training (MUST), a new unsupervised adaptation method which leverages two
different and complementary sources of training signals: pseudo-labels and raw
images. MUST jointly optimizes three objectives to learn both class-level global
feature and pixel-level local feature and enforces a regularization between the two.
We demonstrate the efficacy of MUST on a variety of downstream tasks, where it
improves upon CLIP by a large margin. MUST also outperforms supervised fewshot adaptation methods. It achieves a top-1 accuracy of 77.7% on ImageNet using
ViT-B, +9.4% higher than CLIP, and +6.2% higher than 16-shot CLIP adaptation.
Our code is available at https://github.com/salesforce/MUST.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Zero-shot image classification is a challenging goal that marks the capability of a vision model to
solve tasks without human supervision. Recently, vision-language pre-training (e.g. CLIP (Radford
et al., 2021)) has shown promising performance on open-vocabulary zero-shot classification, where
it leverages web-scale image-text pairs to train image and text encoders that can be transferred to
downstream tasks through natural language prompting. However, the zero-shot performance of CLIP
is often inadequate for real-world adoptions, especially when compared to models that are trained
with supervised learning. On the other hand, there are abundant unlabeled data available for many
tasks. In this paper, we aim to improve the performance of an open-vocabulary zero-shot classifier by
finetuning it on unlabeled images from a downstream task.
Given unlabeled data, the key question is: what is the source of supervision? Numerous papers have
attempted to answer this question. Among them, self-training and self-supervised learning are two of
the most dominant approaches. In self-training (Zoph et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2013),
pseudo-labels are generated by a teacher model and then used to supervise task-specific training of a
student model, where the student usually has an equal model size as the teacher. On the other hand,
self-supervised learning methods are generally task-agnostic. Masked image modeling (Bao et al.,
2022; He et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022), which trains the model to predict missing information from
masked image patches, has recently emerged as the superior self-supervised learning method for
vision transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). However, both self-training and self-supervised
learning have their limitations. Self-training overly relies on the pseudo-labels as the only source
of supervision, thus is prone to overfitting to the noise in pseudo-labels. Self-supervised learning
requires an additional stage of task-specific finetuning on labeled data, thus is not a one-stop solution.
In this paper, we propose Masked Unsupervised Self-Training (MUST), a simple and effective method
for label-free image classification. MUST performs unsupervised learning using both pseudo-labels
and raw images as two different and complementary training signals. Specifically, MUST jointly
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

optimizes three objectives to finetune a pre-trained classification model (e.g. CLIP) on unlabeled
images: (1) Self-training objective to learn global task-specific class prediction; (2) Masked image
modeling objective to learn local pixel-level information; (3) Global-local feature alignment objective
to bridge the knowledge learned from the two sources of supervision.
We validate the efficacy of MUST on 8 image classification tasks across a variety of domains, showing
significant improvement over CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). MUST also outperforms supervised fewshot adaptation methods (Zhou et al., 2021; 2022). For instance, MUST achieves 77.7% top-1
accuracy on ImageNet, +9.4% higher than CLIP, and +6.2% higher than 16-shot CLIP adaptation.
On certain domains, MUST can achieve comparable performance with a fully-supervised method.
We further perform extensive quantitative and qualitative analysis to examine the effect of each
proposed component. MUST is a low-cost solution for image classification that unlocks the potential
of CLIP-like models for practical scenarios where images are abundant but labels are scarce.

2

R ELATED W ORK

Zero-shot learning traditionally aims to recognize unseen classes by training the model on base
classes (Xian et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019), where the most common approach is to utilize
auxiliary information such as attributes (Huynh & Elhamifar, 2020) or knowledge graphs (Wang
et al., 2018). CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) popularizes a new approach for open-vocabulary zero-shot
image classification by leveraging natural language supervision from web-scale datasets. Despite its
impressive performance, the zero-shot accuracy of CLIP stills falls far below the supervised method in
many domains. Some recent work tries to adapt CLIP to downstream tasks using labeled data (Zhou
et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2021), which is less scalable compared to our unsupervised adaptation method.
Our method is also orthogonal to CLIP-like research in model pre-training and can be applied to
other image classification models (Jia et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021),
such as LiT (Zhai et al., 2022) which performs two-stage pre-training.
Self-training has shown promising progress in many domains including vision (Zoph et al., 2020; Xie
et al., 2020; Sahito et al., 2022), NLP (He et al., 2020a), and speech (Kahn et al., 2020). Our method is
more closely related to the self-training approaches proposed for semi-supervised learning (Tarvainen
& Valpola, 2017; Sohn et al., 2020; Berthelot et al., 2020), where pseudo-labels on unlabeled data
are used as training targets. We construct our self-training objective by following three principles:
(1) consistency regularization (Sohn et al., 2020; Laine & Aila, 2017) which enforces the model
to output the same prediction when the input is perturbed; (2) entropy minimization (Grandvalet
& Bengio, 2004) which encourages the model to give “sharp” predictions with low entropy; (3)
prediction fairness (Berthelot et al., 2020) which alleviates the model’s bias towards certain classes.
Our method leverages a separate supervision signal from raw image pixels to reduce the confirmation
bias in self-training, which is orthogonal to methods for pseudo-label debiasing (Wei et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022).
Masked image modeling, fueled by the success of vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021),
recently emerged as a more appealing self-supervised representation learning method over contrastive
learning (He et al., 2020b; Chen et al., 2020; Hjelm et al., 2019). While some methods train the
model to predict discrete tokens (Bao et al., 2022) or contextualized representations (Baevski et al.,
2022) for masked image patches, MAE (He et al., 2021) and SimMIM (Xie et al., 2022) achieve
competitive performance by simply predicting the pixel values. The MIM objective has also been
used for test-time training (Gandelsman et al., 2022). Different from existing self-supervised learning
methods which require an additional stage of supervised finetuning on labeled data, we synergically
incorporate masked image modeling into self-training as a one-stage solution for zero-shot image
classification.

3

M ETHOD

MUST is a simple unsupervised learning approach that adapts a pre-trained open-vocabulary classifier
to a downstream task using unlabeled images. In this paper, we consider vision transformers pretrained by CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as the models to be adapted due to their distinctive zero-shot
performance. CLIP pre-trains an image encoder and a text encoder with a contrastive loss such that
paired images and texts have higher similarities in a shared embedding space. In order to perform
zero-shot classification, CLIP converts a set of class names into text embeddings using ensemble of
2

